Database Format Notes:
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
All databases are flat ASCII files for easy transport to other platforms and applications.


BOOKS.TXT
---------
List each of the 27 books of the New Covenant in various forms, consisting of a header 
line, and followed by comma-delimited text with various renditions of the titles, plus 
the number of chapters in each Book.

Example, following are the first 3 lines of the file:

ID,SRT,NAME,PROPER,CHAPTERS
01,MAT,MATTHEW,Matthew,28
02,MRK,MARK,Mark,16


BIBLE VERSIONS
--------------
This database contains 7 separate versions of the New Covenant Bible: GREEK.TXT, 
KJV.TXT, MKJV.TXT, RSV.TXT, YLT.TXT, WEB.TXT, and ASV.TXT.

Each line consists of an artificial invention only created in 1551 (for strictly 
academic research) called verses.  These are arbitrarily fashioned, as often verses 
actually break a single sentence in more than one portion (Chapters were invented in 
the late fifth century, breaking the text up where the sense of the text changes).

Each line of each Bible database consisted of a ID tag and the words of the verse, 
being space-delimited.  A header consist of the Book, chapter, and verse, in the 
format: 010203, indicating Book 1 (Matthew), Chapter 2, Verse 3.  Notice that in this
file that verses that do not contain Greek text may have an Asterisk following the
header. This indicates to the application a verse that NEVER contained Greek text (the
others which eventually were given Greek text, this Greek text was translated from
the Latin Vulgate Bible; but this makes them no more viable or valid -- perhaps less so).

GREEK.TXT contains the Greek version.  Notice that the standard Symbol Font is used 
(it is also the easiest to type Greek text in).  Notice also that this text contains 
absolutely no punctuation.  This is the way it SHOULD be, as punctuation did not exist 
in this text until the ninth century.

Notice that some verse text appears to be "missing".  They are not there because they 
originally never existed (some do not exist to this day, but were added from the much 
later Vulgate Latin text).  For example, the story of the adulterous woman brought to 
Jesus described in John 7:53, and John 8:1 through 8:11, never originally existed in 
the Greek text, being added many centuries later.

KJV.TXT is the 1611 edition of the King James Version, updated to Victorian spelling and
grammar.

MKJV.TXT is the 1999 edition of the Modern King James Version.

RSV.TXT is the 1971 edition of the Revised Standard Version.

YLT.TXT is the 1898 Young's Literal Translation.  You may note that this is not quite as 
literal as it boasts (as you will see by viewing ACTUAL literal translations of 
verses for yourself with this program).

WEB.TXT is the 1907 edition of the World English Bible version. Note that in order to
accomodate this bible, I had to (RE)rearrange their movement of Romans 16:25-27 to Romans
14:24-26 BACK to 16:25-27 (there is a note at the end of 14:23 explaining this, as well
as Notes in 16:25, 16:26, and 16:27 explaing this. I had to do this in order to keep the
1551 verse standard compliant between all versions of the New Covenant.  My Apologies
to Fans of the WEB (I do, in the verse notes for 14:23, include these 3 verses).

ASV.TXT is the 1901 American Standard Version.

DBY.TXT is the 1884 edition of Darby's Translation.

WBS.TXT is the 1833 edition of Webster's Translation.

A later-added Bible is named MPV.TXT (My Personal Version), and is based upon YOUR
choice of Bibles (just to get things rolling).  This is updated as YOUtranscribe each 
verses and update these transliterated verses to this database.

All these versions of the New Covenant contain exactly 7957 lines of verse, even if the
verse data is not present (many newer versions appropriately dropped verses that did not
exist in the Greek (these were verses that the Church Fathers ADDED from the 4th through
the 9th centuries).  If a verse contains no data, then it will still contain the header
for the verse assigned to that location by the 1551 standard.


GREEKBBL.TXT
------------
This is a reference reflection of the GREEK.TXT, formatted in much the same way, but 
with indexes instead of words.  Each index for each word points to a line number in 
the GREEKDEFREF.FILE.


VINEREF
-------
This database contains tab-delimited records made up of 3 fields.  The first field
is simply a numeric reference ID tag.  The second field is a list of similar or
related words.  The third field is a definition of the word or words.  The "\"
character is a placeholder for Newline codes, and words enclosed within Curly
braces "{word}" will be displayed in the Greek character set (Symbol).


GREEKDEFREF.TXT
---------------
This is a tab-delimited file consisting of 6 fields, indicating ID, the root Greek 
word, its Latinized rendition, phonetic pronunciations guide, Strong's Index Number, 
and the "Definition Notes Data".  Notice that a backslash "\" indicates a New Line 
code (Linefeed or Carriage-Return/Linefeed, depending upon the platform).

The Strong's reference number is an index to the popular Strong's Concise Reference.  
However, in practical terms, it is also an index to a line number in the 
GREEKWORDREF.TXT file.


GREEKWORDREF.TXT
----------------
This is a tab-delimited file consisting of 3 fields.  The first field is an index ID, 
the second field is a "Quickie" index for the last word indexed within each line's list. 
The third field is actually a comma-delimited list of current optional synonyms for 
each referenced Greek word (you can add more practical synonyms within the program).  
This data is used to offer you the list of optional synonyms to apply to each 
transliterated verse.


VNOTES.TXT
----------
This is a database containing over 6900 fixes and corrections to older Bible 
translations.  Verse data for each displayed verse is shown within the program.  There 
is not one chapter in the New Covenant that does not have error-corrections listed.

This file is a flat string, consisting of a book, chapter, and verse 6-character 
header (like the verses of the above bible versions), and followed by text.  A 
backslash indicates a new line character.


WORDMAP.TXT
-----------
This database file is created on program startup.  It creates a map similar to 
GREEKDEFREF.TXT, except that each index is initially -1.  Once a verse is displayed, 
indexes into the synonym list in GREEKWORDREF.TXT are applied, initially based upon 
last-made choices for each of the words the user had previously selected, defaulting 
to the first (0) if no choices can be detected.  Once the user actually chooses a 
synonym, then defaults are no longer applied, but are locked and record in this 
database file.  An index entry exists for every single word in the GREEK.TXT file.


MYNOTES.TXT
-----------
This file is created upon program startup.  Its formatting is exactly the same as the bible
files, such as KJV.TXT or GREEK.TXT, but the "verse" data are notes that you add
through an editor, or editing this file with a text editor.

Each line of this database consists of a ID tag and the words of the notes, 
being space-delimited.  A header consist of the Book, chapter, and verse, in the 
format: 010203, indicating Book 1 (Matthew), Chapter 2, Verse 3. This is followed by a
space, and then the text of the name.  Notice that a backslash "\" is used to tag
Newline code, and text enclosed within Curly Braces "{word}" are
assumed to be displayed in the Greek character set (Symbol font).


PMAP.TXT
--------
This is a map of each verse in the New Covenant.  It is one long string of characters,
where each successive character position presents a verse (hence, the first character
position represents Matthew 1:1, and the last character position is Revelation 22:21).
If the current verse is the start of a new paragraph, it is tagged with a "$" character,
otherwise it is a space, unless it is the first verse of a chapter, and then it is also
tagged with a space.


KJVDICT.TXT
-----------
This is a 2-column tab-delimited file that contains a KJV term and its cooresponding
modern equivalent meaning.


KJVVERSEWORDS.TXT
-----------
This is a 2-column file.  The first column contains the Bible Book, Chapter, and verse
tag, in a BBCCVV format.  The second column is a comma-delimited field containing KJV
words used in translating each verse.  Each word corresponds to a entry in the
KJVVERSEINDEX.TXT file, which in turn points to a line in the GREEKDEFREF.TXT file. This
file is used to let the user explore the original methods used for translating the KJV
back in the early 1600's.


KJVVERSEINDEX.TXT
-----------
This is a 2-column file.  The first column contains the Bible Book, Chapter, and verse
tag, in a BBCCVV format.  The second column is a comma-delimited field containing KJV
index values used in translating each verse.  Each index corresponds to a word entry in
the KJVVERSEWORDS.TXT file. It points to a line in the GREEKDEFREF.TXT file. This file 
is used to let the user explore the original methods used for translating the KJV
back in the early 1600's.

