You can display the current verse in context by double-clicking the Greek text's verse header (i.e., Greek: Matthew 1:1).
You can examine the complete current chapter using the active comparison bible by hitting F4.
You can break an entire Greek verse down and display all definitions for each word at once by hitting F8, or clicking the Analyze button.
You can compare interpretations of the current verse against all other comparison bibles by hitting Ctrl-K.
You can search for individual words or phrases in the Definition Panel (top-right) by hitting Ctrl-S.
You can go directly to a desired book, verse and chapter by hitting the F5 key and answering the prompt, or by selecting the book, chapter and verse from the main menu lists, and hitting the GO button.
You can write out a formatted Rich text or flat text bible using the active comparison bible, optionally include your personal notes and/or theological notes, and you can add spacing between verses for penciled notes in printouts.
The View menu contains an option so that you can examine a dictionary of over 1700 King James Version words, and see how they would be defined today, to express their 17th century meanings. Many of these original definitions may surprise you.
You can save a backup copy of the modified database files by hitting F9.
You can immediately save changes to the databases by hitting Ctrl-S.
You can set the program to auto-save any changes back to the databases over specific periods from options on the Backup dialog (F9).
You can double-click any word, not just capitalized words, in the Definition panel to get a definition of that word.
The Strong # reference is a catalogued reference to Bible Greek words, and is available from many books, such as Strong's Concise Concordance of the Bible.
"Covenant" is a much more accurate translation of the Semitic word, "Beriyth", for "Agreement" than "Testament". Using Agreement instead, though of course most accurate, is rather vague in English.  Actually, the original meaning of the word for "Agreement" meant, "to eat bread with".
That most Jews lived outside of Judea by the Gospel period, and most of those spoke Greek, not Hebrew.  Indeed, most-all Jews within Judea spoke Aramaic (the original Yiddish"), and the only people who spoke Hebrew were the Priest Class.
You can use the "History" arrows next to the verse slider to move back to previously visited verses, and move back again, toward where you were.
There are 131 instances of double negative used in the New Covenant, and every one of them in current translations is mistranslated to being negative, when they were meant to give emphasis to a statement that was actually positive. Obviously, the original translators (whose example later translators followed) were not paying attention in Grammar School class.
The Young's Literal Translation (1898) was thought to be the most literal translation of its time. Unfortunately, it uses KJV definitions for words that had in fact changed significantly, even by 1898. Also, traditions dictated by Church authorities being often stringent to the point of blindness, many inaccurate interpretations of key verses were maintained.
When you create a Personal Version of the Bible (referred to as My Personal Version), from the File menu, you can base its original, not-yet-edited composition upon your choice of the other comparison bibles. Initially, it will be a mirror image of the chosen comparison bible, until you start updating it by applying your own transliterations of verses from the direct translations.
When a verse is displayed that contains a personal note that you had written, a "Personal Notes" label is displayed above the Theological Notes in the lower-right panel. You can click this flagging label to scroll your notes automatically up into view.
You can add or modify personal notes on verses by selecting the "Add/Edit Notes" button.
Verse numbers did not actually exist until they were introduced in 1551. Before then, readings were by book and chapter (though even then, chapters were not introduced until the late 4th century).
Punctuation in the Bible Greek text did not exist at all until the 9th century. But even then, it consisted of a single dot between lines of text.  More modern styles of punctuation, such as accents, periods, commas, and paragraph breaks, did not exist until much later.  Indeed, until the 9th century, each book of the New Covenant was just one long continuous stream of single-case words with no breaks of any kind, except spaces between words.
Chapters did not generally exist until the 5th century, and the only known earlier samples are two from the late 4th century.  Chapters were simply added where there was an evident break in the flow of the text.
The current 1611 edition of the King James Bible is not written using verbiage of that time, but has been updated for more modern spelling of words of the Victorian Era. Many people would have trouble reading an ACTUAL 1611 edition of the KJV, mainly because there were no standards of spelling (phonetics was thought more important), and general grammar rules were not yet firmly established.
To "Throw stones" is not to hurl stones at someone, but to vote by casting small smooth voting stones, often Black for NO and White for YES, into urns, which were afterward tallied. This method of casting stones (pebbles), from Greek {Ballw} (Ballo), is where we get the word Ballot.
In Gospel times, to "hang oneself" was to confess to a crime that was punishable by crucifixion (their slang word for "crucify" was "hang").
In the KJV, the words "Anon", "After a time", and "By and by", originally meant, "Immediately".
The word "Heresy" simply means "choice". The problem was, many in power did not want you to have a choice, and so they made this simple word into a term of condemnation. Indeed, in the KJV, its use of the term "Heresies" actually refers to any other religious or spiritualist factions that did not agree with any particular belief system (the Roman Church was originally also just one small faction among many other belief systems).
In the KJV, to be pitiful originally meant that one was full of pity; compassionate.
You can use the arrow keys to quickly navigate through words, synonyms, verses, chapters, and books. See the Help menu for the "Keyboard Navigation Help" option.
Allowing ordinary people to personally translate scripture for themselves has been known in the past to be punishable by depraved torture, and most-often death. The question you have to ask yourself is, what is it in these writings that the Church authorities did not want them to truly see?
There are dozens of verses in the New Covenant that did not exist in the original texts, and many of these verses had NEVER existed in the Greek text, even to this day.  These were added prior to 1551 (when verse numbers were invented), usually from "enhanced" translations, or from the Vulgate Latin translations, which accounts for most ecclesiastic editorial extensions, which should today be considered invalid corruptions of the text.
You can search verses of a selected bible for a word, phrase, or any from a list of words by hitting Ctrl-F.
When the Gospels speak of resurrection, they were referring to the then-commonly understood Pharisee concept of reincarnation, which was then called resurrection, or a second coming.
Until the 12th century, when a person was excommunicated (symbolically put to death – removed from communication with the "Living"), they were wrapped in burial clothes and entombed in a crypt for 4 days. At the end of the 4th day they were released from the tomb and were shunned; no longer acknowledged as being alive, but mourned as one dead.  This spawned the medieval tales of the walking dead, who rose from their tombs after sunset (on the 4th day).
The Greek word {LogoV} (Logos), which is often translated to "Word", more accurately translates to Wisdom or Doctrine.  The common symbol of Logos was a wise serpent (which did not assume evil connotations until many centuries later).
Apart from the default background that this application uses, you can design your own personal background themes from the "Backgrounds" menu.
Jesus did not teach the Pauline concepts of Sin and Repentance.  Jesus instead taught about Illusion and Enlightenment. The "story" about Jesus teaching about Sin and Repentance in John 7:53 through John 8:11 did not originally exist in Greek texts, but was added later by translating later-defined Vulgate Latin additions to scripture into Greek, creating invalid Greek "versions".  Jesus most certainly did not teach about guilt and punishment, but rather about compassion, forgiveness, spiritual awakening, and seeking one's way back to God.
Synonyms are words that have similar, or the same meaning. Modern English currently has over 30 million examples of word use.  Modern Greek has only about 600 thousand. Ancient Greek had less than 50 thousand words.  Consequentially, placing 1000 monks in a room to individually translate one ancient Greek verse into modern English will probably result in 1000 different variations.
Common Greek of the Gospel period, called Koine (meaning "common"), and now called Bible Greek or New Testament Greek, was developed by command of Alexander the Great, so that there would be a language that all his armies from across his vast empire could use to communicate easily. This results in a universal language that was used all across the known world, and was eagerly employed used by writers so that their work could reach the broadest audience.
With the introduction of the King James Version, and the work of William Shakespeare (who took advantage the new lexicon to flower his plays),  the English language grew by about 50 percent, drawing many ancient, unused words, such as "Host" (meaning "band of soldiers") out of retirement.
When the King James Version of the Bible was being reviewed before release, Catholics were accusing its scribes of favoring the Protestants, while at the same time the Protestants were accusing its scribes of favoring the Catholics.  As a result, the 1611 edition of the KJV was probably the very first large-scale "politically correct" work every written.
The artificial invention of verses in 1551 has caused many sentences to be improperly broken up. For example, Acts 8:1 and 8:2 should actually be one long verse, and 8:1 should not end in a period, as the next verse is a continuation of 8:1, which is only obvious if you examine the Greek text.
When the Jews talked about the Earth, they were not speaking of the planet, but of the region, the surrounding land, they lived on.
When writing transliterations of verses in your personal bible, you can add scribal transliteration notes to the verse by following the transliterated verse with a paragraph break (ENTER key), and then add the scribal note. 
The Annas brothers, Eleazar (the doctrinal mentor of Jesus, in his youth), Jonathan (the Apostle Nathaniel), Theophilus, and  Matthew (the Apostle), were all Levite priests and all sons of Ananus, the founder of the Peace Party, whose family symbol was a white dove, and whose slogan was, "Peace be with you".
Women, who were wed to men who were going through ascetic seclusion, wore black mourning mantles, because during their husband's seclusion, the men were considered to be in "Daath" (the Semitic from which we get the word "Death"), which means Spiritual Knowledge.  This practice was the origin of Nuns.
Jerusalem is quite often written in a plural form within Greek Gospel text.  This was a concealment device used by their authors to hide actual locations from the Romans, who were actively hunting down the early Jewish Christians.  A Plural Jerusalem actually referred to Qumrân, an Essene/Zealot refuge on a cliff-side above the Dead Sea.
There is a separate application in this program, named "ViewBible", which allows you to view a generated bible file without having to start up the main application.
The most important Gospel, the Gospel of John, was so Gnostic in nature and so open to women that it was almost not added to the early 4th century canon, and was the subject of long debates. It was finally added when the text was changed to not favor women, and the identity of Mary Magdalene, the Beloved Disciple, was obscured; creating a John Mark/Bartholomew identity.
The brilliant and moving Gospel of Philip, the Gospel of Thomas, and many other gospels that were written by (or for) the very Apostles themselves, were not added to the early 4th century Christian Bible canon, because they did not lean in the political direction that Emperor Constantine wanted. Many of these other gospels still exist, and you can find them at www.earlychristianwritings.com.
According to the Gospel of Matthew, Jesus was born in a house, not a stable. The idea of a stable actually comes from ancient Persian theology, who celebrated the birth of the Sun God, Mithra (called Sol Invictus in Rome), born in around 600 BC on the Winter Solstice (the 25th of December during the Gospel period), was put to death, and rose from the dead during the Persian Festival of Easter. His birthday was a happy time of good cheer, and people exchanged gifts.
Every 480 years (12 generations), a Jewish Shekinah (in honor of the Holy Spirit; called the Mother Goddess in ancient theology), the planets Venus and Mercury are in such tight alignment they appear as a single, incredibly bright star.  Its conjunction on 25 December of 7 BC was expected to herald the return of the Savior Messiah, Joshua (pronounced Ye-ho-shua), from Exodus fame. This is how Jesus, born 7 BC, got his name (Jesus and Joshua are synonymous, and elder Bibles actually translated Joshua as Jesus).
Joshua (pronounced Ye-ho-shua), Jesus, Esias, Essa, and Isaiah are all variations of the very same name, Yehoshua, and are in fact synonymous. The literal translation of the title Essene (the third branch of Judaism, of Qumrân and Mt Carmel fame) is "Followers of Essa", and the book of Isaiah was held as their most sacred book. Prior to English Language Bibles, Joshua was often translated to Greek "Iesous", pronounced "ee-ay-sooce" (Jesus).
The "Recognitions of Clement" and the "Clementine Homilies" are cited as being valid early Christian history, covering the Acts period, but it was rejected from being added to the 4th century canon because Clement disliked Paul, or did not seem to agree with Paul’s often skewed accounts. Clement recorded Paul as being the one who PERSONALLY tried to murder Stephen (he was not just standing around, as he had claimed to Luke in Acts).
All Roman Citizens, no matter what religion, were required to prove worship of Caesar once a year or they could be put to the sword. No exceptions. Though there was a dispensation for the general inhabitants of Judea to worship their own God, it DID NOT apply to people of Judea who were ALSO Roman Citizens.
The term Messiah/Messiach comes from Egyptian Messeh, for their hero Messeh Pharaohs (Anointed Kings). The term and title "Pharaoh Thutmose", given to the most renowned King of Egypt, directly translates to English as "King David, the Righteous".
The sanitized term "severely scourged" referred to a brutal practice of cutting or pulling a person in half.
Women in Judea, despite being considered of less stature than a man, were considered so close to God that they could not be excommunicated (excommunication is not just a Christian term). As such, this highlights the fact that the "tradition" of masculine superiority was a later-added corruption of an earlier wiser doctrine, when women were considered equals (peeking beneath the surface of the pre-Moses patriarchal stories makes this all too clear).
The planet Venus (called Lucifer, the Morning Star, and the Evening Star), was the symbol of the Holy Spirit in ancient Judea, and was the most accurate means of keeping time until the invention of atomic clocks in 1957. Every eight years it was especially bright on the Winter Solstice (then 25 December), and the lunar, sidereal, and solar calendars were aligned to within minutes of each other. Every 40 years (8 x 5; a generation), they all three aligned to within a fraction of a second of each other.
The term "I am that I am" is a term that is actually the very same as saying, "My name is irrelevant".
Though some people claim Jesus never laughed (now THAT would be a miracle), he had an incredible sense of humor, and also played with words.  For example, in the Gospel of Thomas (part of the Nag Hammadi collection, available at www.earlychristianwritings.com) he said, "If the blind lead the blind; they will both end up in the ditch." In the recently discovered Gospel of Judas, Jesus is said to laugh often.
If you study the gospels (and the non-canon gospels actually written by the Apostles) carefully, you will see that Jesus taught his deeper secrets only to Mary Magdalene, Martha, Simon Zealot, Thomas, Philip, and Matthew.  He did not teach them to Peter, Andrew, Titus, Luke, John of Zebedee, or Paul.  Interestingly, all those he taught his deeper mysteries to were also all of royal blood.
Mary Magdalene got her name not from a mythical city named Magdala, but from an Office (Official Privilege) that she and also Martha inherited: Migdal-eder (Tower of the Flock), as described in (OT) Mica 4:8; "And thou, O tower of the flock, the strong hold of the daughter of Zion, unto thee shall it come, even the first dominion; the kingdom shall come to the daughter of Jerusalem."  This was a VERY prestigious office of great responsibility given to a royal Jewess of unblemished reputation, who has not shamed their name or family (you have to wonder about all the fabricated "stories" the Church, in fear of women, made up about her).
The Term "Nazarite" comes from (OT) Numbers, chapter 6, which defines the rules for the Nazarite order (Samson and Samuel were Nazarites), having nothing to do with Nazareth (est. 60-70 AD).  However, "Nazarite" is pronounced "Nazareth", and "Jesus of Nazareth" more accurately translates to "Jesus the Nazarite", "Jesus this/that Nazarite", or even "Jesus of the Nazarite".  Nazarite comes from Semitic Nazyir (Naw-zeer), meaning "consecrated, or devoted one".
This software application features almost 7000 corrections to mistranslations of Greek verse. These are reported in the Theological Update Notes. When you write a bible file (under the Bible menu), select the "Include Theological Notes at the end of each chapter" option, and the entire list of these notes will be written out, actually doubling the size of the output bible file.
Peter (masculine Greek Petro, for Stone) also had the name Cephas (masculine Hebrew for Stone). People often assume that the "Rock" Jesus mentions in Matthew 16:18 refers to Peter, but the word is feminine Greek Petra (feminine Hebrew Tzur), and Peter's name could only mean this referenced Rock if it was the Masculine Hebrew Eben, but not a feminine derivation. However, Jesus used the feminine form, which refers to the feminine-named Pillar of Jacob, the Rock of Israel, representing the Davidic Messianic Bloodline (the Royal House of Judah) that he was descended from. A more precise transliteration of Matthew 16:18 is, therefore, " And I but to you say, that you, you are a stone; rather upon this, the Rock, shall be established my circle of adherents, and the gates of the Hidden World shall not overcome it."
Many modern translations inaccurately translate Hades as Hell.  During the Gospel period, Hades was not considered an evil place, but simply a term used to describe the Afterlife; the hidden world beyond the physical realm.  Sometimes interpreters have inaccurately added "fire" to this word.
Many modern translations inaccurately translate Gehenna as Hell. Gehenna was a trash dump outside the city of Jerusalem, in the valley of Hinnon, where trash and corpses of condemned prisoners were burned.  It was so large that there was always a fire burning somewhere in Gehenna, and was used as a commonly-understood analogy for desolation of spirit.
The Anglo-Saxon word Hell reflects the Semitic Sheol, which simply means "Grave-pit".  So, technically, anyone who is buried in a grave-pit is in "Hell".
The idea of Satan being "evil" did not come about until the 4th century, in an attempt to draw more people under the Church's thumb.  Before then, Satan was just another heavenly angel working at the behest of God (all mentions of Satan in the OT clearly support this). In the 7th century, Pope Gregory came up with the idea that Satan had horns (a symbol of heavenly communication), hooves, and that he could control weather (important for drawing pagan farmers to the Church). Centuries later, this was embellished to include bat wings, a snake tail, and red skin.
Seventy percent of the solid matter in the Dead Sea is monatomic gold, which causes the pineal gland to produce melatonin and raise a person's spiritual consciousness and IQ. This substance, collected in the complex water filtration systems at Qumrân by the Dead Sea, was added to the manna bread served during the Jewish Eucharist (this was NOT a Christian invention) with wine during sacred evening meals (called the Agape, or Love Feast).  The term "Manna" originated from the Chaldaic "Shem-an-na", referring to the Shewbread ("Shining Bread"). This word translates to both, "Highward Firestone" and, "the shining metal that raises", referring to its ability to raise one into a more advanced spiritual state.
In the KJV, the word "Charity" meant "Spiritual Love".
In the KJV, the word "Followers" meant "Imitators".
In the KJV, to be possessed by demons or spirits meant that one was insane.
The term "to astonish" was to "cast out, to drive out with a blow". This term maintained this meaning even after the Middle Ages, where villains were often reported as being "astonished" from regions, meaning that they were beaten or driven out. Indeed, from the Greek in Acts 13:12, the Proconsul (Deputy) was not astonished, but it actually reports that HE astonished, meaning he was driving someone out. Who? The teachings of the Master (A master is NOT exclusively Jesus, but indicates ANY leader of a group, which is Paul in this case).  Also, when it reports that the Proconsul "believed", what this means was that he understood what was happening. If you dissect the story in Acts 13 of BarJesus ("Minister of Jesus"), called Elymas (meaning "Wise Man"), called a sorcerer (actually the word translates to "Magi"), and you understand that Paul hated the Magi because he believed they were a threat to him (he later participated in burning the Magi Library in 57 AD), and understand that he is viciously derisive and often quite blasphemous to all he persecutes, a totally different story will emerge (also, BarJesus was NOT blinded, but the Greek actually translates to him being confused – probably because Paul was making no sense – and that he was seeking another's help in understanding what was going on).
Most terms relating to eating meat in the New Covenant are inaccurate, and actually simply refer to food in general.  The mainstay food of Judea was bread.
The term "Nephew" referred to a descendant, or a grandson.
The early church, recognizing the higher spiritual nature of women, honored them as priestesses, prophetesses, and bishops. They would even Shepard congregations, take confessions, and give the Eucharist. This changed with the ultimate subjugation of general Christianity by the Roman Church, which rabidly feared and hated women, calling them all heretics and sorceresses. Certain specific women were ultimately allowed into their theology due to overwhelming insistence from the people, who had an almost instinctual need for the Divine Feminine to be expressed.
Using the Favorites menu allows you to explore other portions of the New Covenant, and then quickly return to where you were focusing your work.
The New Covenant contains exactly 7957 verses. Of these, 58 are known NOT to be original. Of these 58, 16 NEVER existed in Greek texts, and the other 42 were later additions to the Greek text, centuries after they were first written, most translated to Greek from the Vulgate Latin Bible.
Many translations of the New Covenant are known to be inaccurate, even by their translators. However, it has been safer to use inaccurate translations than to bring ire down on their heads from senior, tenured scholars who were resting on their laurels, who are often quick to strike with wrath when their opinions are questioned, even when it is clear that they are wrong (you will understand this all too clearly when you begin your own translations directly from the Greek text).
You may notice when you examine the direct Greek translations yourself, that every once in a while, the Theological Notes do not agree with what is being said in the direct translation. As such, always use the Theological Notes as guidelines, but put more weight of value on the actual direct translation than their "interpretations" of the actual translation (most-all will, of course, be quite valid and helpful).  Some, of course, are wrong simply because they were using more recent Greek manuscripts, which were altered by later scribes.
In Judea, if children did not go on to higher learning, they usually wed early: Boys at 13, and Girls at 12.
An apprenticeship lasted for 7 years, during which time the apprentice was a legal slave to their Master.
Scholastic students, where higher learning could last until they were 24, were legal slaves to their Master during this time.
All database files in this application are plain text files, and can be used within your own applications. The file "Database Format Notes.txt" in the application's DB folder explains the simple format of each of these files.
In the KJV, the word "Sometimes" meant "Formerly".
From the epic Babylonian histories that the Jews derived their Creations stories, the Babylonian word "ti-it", meaning "that which is life"; an ovum, was mistranslated to "tit", which means "rib". The Hebrew word "Tsela" was used, which can also mean "rib", but more clearly means "the other side of". This indicated, as highlighted even by ancient Jewish commentary, that woman did not come from the rib of man, but rather that she was the other side of a man; making her his equal.
That the line of Cain (Q'ayin) were not cursed, but "set apart" because it was from their line that all kings and queens and all of royalty sprang forth (this tradition is world-wide, even as far away as Japan). Careful study of OT scripture clearly verifies this. Indeed, scripture clearly indicate that Cain was not a tiller of the earth, but had dominion over the earth.  Also, the word "yaqam", which means to be "elevated or exalted over", was mistranslated to "slew", in regard to the story of Q'ayin and Havel (Cain and Able). Finally, from Q'ayin comes the title for both "King" (Q'ayin; Q'ain) and Queen (Q'ayin; Q'yin).
That the reason that women in the Catholic Church cannot be priests or bishops or give the Eucharist is because of a document written by an ardent Paulist, called the "Apostolic Order".  This document is known to be contrived and a forgery, just like the world's most famous forgery, the fabricated "Donation of Constantine", which was written well over 4 centuries after Constantine's death to give the ancient Catholic Church ecclesiastic control over the entire Roman Empire.
Why do your own translations of Greek text? Try starting and you will discover something new and wonderful that you would have otherwise missed. As Jesus said in the Gospel of Thomas (part of the Nag Hammadi collection, available at www.earlychristianwritings.com), "Let him who seeks continue seeking until he finds.  When he finds, he will become troubled.  When he becomes troubled, he will be astonished, and he will rule over all things."
It is becoming a general "fad" to pronounce Jesus' name "properly", or so they all say, because people seem to be saying a different name as their new "proper" name for him: Yeshua, Yeheshua, ye'shua, Yeshuwa, Yehoshua, Yeho-shua, Yah'shuha, Joshua, Iesus, Ioseus, Issa, Essa, Esias, Isaiah, and on and on.  I wish they would make up their minds on the correct pronunciation.
That the Greek word, "{Telonion}", which translates to Tax, or receipt of custom (see Mark 2:14 and Luke 5:27), actually would today mean "Tithe".  These tithes were used to support the Levite Priests (from which we get the term, "Levied Taxes").  Also, a Publican (Greek "{TeloneV}") was not, as many too often assume, a Tax Collector for the Romans, but rather a Tithe Collector for the Temple.  This would explain clearly that the Apostle Matthew Annas, a Levite Priest, who seems to have become High Priest in 43 AD, was not a hated Tax collector for the Romans, but a hated Tithe collector for the Temple.  A person paying 10% of their income (usually traded in produce, such as food, meat, etc.) was in strict accordance to the Law of Moses, though it was, as populations grew, also making the Priestly Class grossly wealthy. This also means that Levi's house in Luke 5:29 was filled with devout, pious priests, and not wild loose partiers, as they are so often depicted in motion picture accounts.
That when Jesus was in his twelfth year, such as when he was being examined by the scholars in the Temple, it refers to his twelfth year as a "Child" (Initiate) within the Community, and within his doctrinal training, which began right after his bar mitzvah at 12-years old.  This means that he was actually 24 years old at the time; the age of full initiation.  After passing this examination, he would join the community religious (political) faction of his choice, thereby becoming a "Man".  This makes more sense when you consider that his parents had simply up and left Jerusalem (plural tense; hence, Qumrân) without giving first thought to the whereabouts of their beloved child, which would have been utterly irresponsible of them if he was indeed only 12 years old.
It was necessary to conceal locations in relation to Qumrân, because it was to become the center for the Jerusalem Church of James Justus, the brother of Jesus, which, beginning in the early AD 30s, due to Zealot (Patriot) activity, were to become labeled as enemies of Rome, and so were being earnestly hunted down by the Romans.  Actually, Jerusalem Church is more accurately translated to Qumrân Church, as the name "Jerusalem" is not presented in its standard singular tense, but rather in a plural tense, which was a common concealment device to hide Qumrân-area locations.
Bethlehem of Judea actually refers to a building known as the "Queen's House", south south-west of Qumrân, not to the literal Bethlehem.  Qumrân was based upon the pre-Christians own model of Jerusalem.  As such, they had locations that coincided with general locations in and around Jerusalem.  The way they differentiated them was by applying a plural tense to place-names (not very much different than simply placing an "s" at the end of a word, as we do in English).  For example, when Luke said that Paul walked from Jerusalem to Jerusalem (Acts 11:27 thru 30, and 12:25), it is written in Greek with first the plural tense, and then the singular; hence, it actually reads that Paul walked from Jerusalems to Jerusalem, and therefore logically meant that Paul had walked from Qumrân to Jerusalem. They did this in their document to protect themselves from the Romans, who were actively hunting them down.
The Gospel of John is replete with distances (reported in stadia; a stadion is 607 feet, and 5 stadia is about one kilometer), which often do not have anything in common with actual distances or routes between actual reported locations.  However, if you look at the singular and plural tenses of the Greek text in regard to these places, you will see that most-often they actually referred to locations relative to the Qumrân area (by the Dead Sea), where the reported distances will match exactly.  Indeed, all of these supposed mistakes in the Gospels can be explained by such tense transpositions.
Personal names were seldom used in the New Covenant and Qumrân texts, or really at all for eleven more centuries, thus employing pseudonyms in their place, as was common throughout history, some people being known by several.  Names, until the 12th century, were pseudonyms or titles anyway, which often changed throughout a lifetime.  This is why you have names such as Baker, Booker, Clark, Cooper, Copper, Carpenter, Fuller, Mason, Miller, Taylor, Teller, Tiller, Roper, Sewer, Skinner, Smith, and such, denoting trades.
Priestly Dynasts, such as the High Priest (Annas), "Public High Priest" (Caiaphas), and the Abiathar priest (like the vice-president to the High Priest) were priests who were senior descendants from the line of Aaron, half-brother to Moses, descending in an unbroken chain from the first or second sons of their forefathers.  This first and second son rule equally applied to Kingly Dynasts descended from King David, such as Jesus and his brother James Justus (The Righteous).
When someone imagines the Magi, they think of people traveling great distances on camels, as Kings of the Orient, trekking from such far-off exotic places as Africa and Persia.  But people might be a little disappointed.  Travel in Judea was by donkey, and rarely by horse, as camels were not common to this area.  Even more, the Magi really did not have to travel very far.  They were members of the Samaritan Magi, centered north of Jerusalem, in Samaria.  Magi were another name for the Magus; Magicians.  These were Gnostics, astrologers, numerologist, and Qabbalists.  They were people of great wisdom, thirsters after deeper inner spiritual knowledge; their sciences we are now only rediscovering.
Contrary to popular belief, the Procurator did not reside in Jerusalem, but on the Mediterranean coast, in Caesarea; a roman city built by the Herods.  Also contrary to popular belief, in AD 6 the capital of Judea was actually moved from Jerusalem to Caesarea, and remained so until long after the Jewish Revolt, and the razing of Jerusalem in AD 70.
Being Roman Procurator for Judea, though it sounds prestigious and very important, was actually only a local administrative position, under the authority of the Governor of Syria.  A minor position; usually pushing a lot of paper, and acting as regional Marshall, keeping the peace. Actually, Pontius Pilate was not very good at it, and he was corrupt, as were most people in such positions, and always open for bribes.
The crescent arcs that create the popular Fish emblem that has been a hallmark of Christians for two millennia came from the "fishing" practice.  The Gentiles were classed against Jewish members at a lower level (non-Jews were considered "inferior" before God).  Their classification as celibate members was rather unique, for, as Gentiles they were classed the same as Villagers (the same low rank as Peter and Andrew), who were assigned the level of Hebrew Daleth (D), and yet were Celibates, so they would also be given the class distinction of the letter Gimel (G).  These two letters together, Daleth-Gimel; D.G., became the Hebrew word Dag (fish).  Also, to this day, many Arabs call Christians Nasrani, which refers to a school of little fishes.
Old, worn books were not simply destroyed.  Though they may be unusable, they were still considered too holy to simply obliterate (kind of like how some people are with old National Geographic Magazines, that they know they will never read again).  Thus, they were stored in a number of caves to allow nature to eventually take its course, and absorb them back into the body of God.
In civil matters, the High Priest functioned as the head of the Sanhedrin, the presidency of which was automatically his. Though technically his authority was treated as the word of God, the actual power of this post had dwindled under Herod the Great, and was now subject to the approval of the Herod.  This post is popularly thought to belong to Caiaphas, but he was, during the Gospel period, the representative of all priests (a title of Priests), and Nathanael (Jonathan Annas) was now High Priest.  People may be understandably confused, because the title of "Priests" was also "Public High Priest", as the public representative of the High Priest, who was normally too busy communing with God.
The original Gospel of Mark reported Lazarus calling out to Jesus from within the tomb, before Jesus released him from excommunication.  The current Gospel of Mark was subject to so much editing that it contains very little of its original content.  The most famous modification was the adding of the last 12 verses (Chapter 16, verses 9 through 20).  Sadly, this edited version of this gospel was then used as the basis for the Gospel of Matthew and the Gospel of Luke.
Some people are convinced that "Mary" has always meant the current Hebrew, "Their Rebellion" or "Bitter".  But this is the result of much later derivations from an original source.  It definitely means "Beloved".  Mary and Miriam were terms of endearment.  "Their Rebellion" or "Bitter" does not seem to appear very endearing, if you ask me.  Consider this: if Mary and Miriam were derived directly from Aramaic Mary and Miriam, which in turn came directly from Egyptian Mery/Merit, which most definitely means "Beloved", then which definition are you going to accept?  During the Exodus, this beloved title assumed another meaning; "Enlightener", which is quite apparent in reading the Book of Jasher, in which Miriam is quite clearly the spiritual leader, prophetess, and priestess of Moses' people, who absolutely adored her.  These definitions are still with us in these derived Aramaic forms, and it was from these Aramaic forms the later Hebrew names were drawn.
The Book of Revelation has often been called, and even labeled, the Apocalypse of John.  However, this is grossly incorrect in our current lexicon, denoting destruction, and had been determined to be so by the third century.  It does not help that Revelation in Greek is "Apokolupsis", which simply mean "revelation", or "to reveal".
The fact that Jesus bled when he was cut (not pierced; an inaccurate translation) was proof that he was still alive; bleeding is a sign of life, proving pulmonary activity.  This explains why the Greek text described Jesus, when they removed him from his cross, as a body ({Soma} (Soma); a sleeping body), and not as a corpse ({Ptoma} (Ptoma); a dead body), which is the word that would have been used if he were known to be dead (See John 19:38, 19:40, and 20:12).  However, Jesus may have thought that he had died after he drank the gall (soured wine and snake poison, called bile or wormwood; suicide was considered an honorable alternative to suffering).
John 1:42 has always reported that Peter's father was named "Jona", but actually {Iwannou} translates properly to "John". Transliterated straight from Greek, this verse translates to, "He led him to this Jesus, who Jesus, considering him, said, You, thou art Peter who is the son of John.  You will be called Cephas (which is, to interpret, "a stone")." Note that the parentheses in this verse are evidently added for a Greek-speaking-only audience.
In Matthew 5:22, the commonly used Aramaic word "Raka" (Raca), was left untranslated, which means "spitting", and was a common derisive insult word, often mistranslated as "empty-headed", but this is actually not far from the intent.
In Matthew 18:19, the commonly used Aramaic word "neshtvon", meaning "worthy", was misconstrued with "methawon", meaning "agree".
In Mark 7:26, in discussing the Syrophenician woman, they mistranslated the common Aramaic word "khaneptha" to "{EllhniV}", meaning Greek, instead of properly to "Heathen".
In Mark 15:19, the commonly used Aramaic phrase "oraken hoaw beapohe", which means "and they spat on his face", was mistranslated as, "and did spit on him". 
In Luke 13:11, the commonly used Aramaic phrase "rokha dekhorhana", meaning "rheumatism", is mistranslated to "{Pneuma}", "spirit". 
In Luke 13:32, the commonly used Aramaic word "meshtamlena", meaning "will be through", is mistranslated to, "{Teleioumai}", meaning, "will be perfected".
In Luke 13:33, the commonly used Aramaic word "esaor", meaning "to work" (spiritual work), is mistranslated to "{Poreuesqai}"; meaning "to walk or to go".
In Luke 14:5, the commonly used Aramaic word "breh", meaning "his son", is mistranslated to "{BouV}", meaning "an ass, an ox, or a cow".
In John 12:20, the commonly used Aramaic word "ammey", meaning "Gentiles", is mistranslated to "{EllhniV}", meaning "Greek".
In Acts 20:28, the commonly used Aramaic phrase "eteh damshikha", meaning "the Church of Christ", was changed to "{Ekklehsian tou Qeou}", meaning "the Church of God".  During the apostolic age, Jesus was called "Our Lord, or Christ".  The apostles being Semites, could not have thought of God as having blood. 
In Romans 5:7, the commonly used Aramaic word "rashiay", meaning "wicked", is mistranslated to Greek "{Dikaiou}", meaning "just man".
It is interesting that the big conflict between Catholics and Protestants over the phrase, "For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever" in Matthew 6:13 does not exist at all in any of the verified elder Greek texts.
Three verses that are causing a lot of controversy is Luke 22:14 through 16, because it actually contains a double-negative.  Here is a direct translation from Greek: "And when it became that time to lie down, the disciples did so with him.  And he said unto them, I have longed to desire to eat this, your paschal sacrifice, before this which I have to undergo.  I say to you that I will not not myself eat until that time it is fulfilled in the royal power from God." Obviously, this direct translation, with the properly translated double-negative, does not say what has taught from the pulpit, as it implies a fulfillment in earthly royal power, which actually did take place within the Jacobite Church that Jesus had founded, basing it upon a dynastic succession, rather than the apostolic succession that was established by Paul.
Due to the fact that most traditional translations of the New Covenant are sometimes VERY inaccurate, there is not one priest, minister, or evangelist who should not therefore be adept at translating the Greek text; because how can anyone truly have confidence in what they preach about if they do not truly understand the words from which they get their ideas?
The Zealots (Patriots) and early Christians considered suicide an honorable alternative to suffering. One common method was to drink "vinegar", called bile or wormwood; meaning snake poison mixed with soured wine.
The argument that the original gospels were all written in Aramaic has been proven invalid. First, the fact that Aramaic words were used proves nothing, as all language borrowed from others. Secondly, ALL the Aramaic documents that seemed to indicate a very early date have been proven to come from the 16th century, as they ALL had a tiny hole inserted over the dates to make them appear about 1000 years older than they actually were. Besides, because Greek was the universal language of the time, and most people under the influence of Rome spoke Greek, the largest audience would be reached using Greek texts. Considering that all New Covenant books were targeting a Greek-speaking audience, not an Aramaic-regional audience, even a logical conclusion is obvious. 
There has been a lot of controversy over the timing of Jesus' birth because of the reference to the Census ordered by the Governor of Syria (who had jurisdiction over the Eastern regions of the Roman Empire), because it did not occur until 6 AD. However, the accounts recorded in Matthew and Luke actually refer to two separate celebrations of birth. The first, recorded in Matthew, was in 7 BC (commonly used code words embedded within the Greek text indicate a birthday of 1 March), the year of a new Epoch, a Jewish Shekinah, when Venus and Mercury were in tight alignment (appearing as a single, VERY bright pre-dawn star) on the Winter Solstice, then 25 December. The second, recorded in Luke, during Jesus' bar mitzvah, when he was 12, when the birth was re-enacted, and a child was considered reborn (resurrected/reincarnated) within the religious community. This common rebirth ceremony exactly coincided with the Census.
Boys went through bar mitzvah at 12, and girls at 14. Apart from the birth being reenacted (including being wrapped in a blanket and to lay in a livestock feeding bin [a manger; the common baby cradle for all in Judea]), it was also recognized as an ACTUAL birth, as the child was being resurrected from an ordinary, mundane existence into the awakened consciousness of a spiritual life within the community.  Indeed, many very religious communities actual counted and recorded their age from this rebirth ceremony, meaning that most-often they were physically 12 or 14 years older.
John the Baptist called Jesus a "Lamb of God". However, a "Lamb of God" was a title given to orphans and illegitimate children (children not necessarily conceived out of wedlock, but simply having no right to inheritance). John's conservative Hebrew party, which would later include Saul of Tarsus, did not recognize Jesus' royal legitimacy, because Jesus was conceived during Dynastic Espousal, but before the first of two weddings, therefore recognizing his brother James (meaning "Supplanter"), born in 1 AD, as the legitimate heir and the {Ha rama qeo} (Ha rama theo; Divine/Royal Highness).  However, the Hellenistic Party Jesus and his regal father belonged to recognized (correctly) that a Dynastic Espousal was in fact a Contractual Wedlock, and so did recognize Jesus' right to regal inheritance.
Governments (political factions, or more accurately, "Harmonious Orders") consisted of a leader and 12 council members, each representing an order or province. This implies that the 12 Apostles were not simply 12 bumpkins. Indeed, Simon Zealot (the Patriot), John Mark, Philip, Thomas, Matthew, and Nathaniel were of dynastic stock (regal or priestly), implying advanced education.
John the Baptist has been called in some circles a false prophet, because his prophecies regarding a catastrophic heavenly intervention which would put Jews in control of the Gentile world did not come true, which is why he fell from power and was arrested (note that Jesus rejected this philosophy, choosing peace with Rome).
Salome, daughter of Herodias and Prince Philip Herod I (the Apostle Thomas), was also a follower of Jesus, and John the Baptist was making her young life impossible. This implies that she had her own personal reasons for bringing about the end of John.
The Apostle Thomas was also known as Prince Philip Herod I (called Philip by his half-brother Antipas in Matthew 14:3).  He got the title of Thomas (Dydymus; Twin) because he was likened to Esau, twin brother to Jacob, sons of Isaac, because Thomas had lost his right to regal inheritance when his mother, Mirriamne II, divorced Herod the Great. Indeed, had his mother not divorced, Thomas would have become King of the Jews, instead of Antipas, and later Agrippa (the one who mocked Jesus at his trial), and who later supplanted the procurators by being made King of the Jews by Caesar Gaius Caligula (it is interesting that both Agrippa and Caligula soon fell into madness).
The famed crown of thorns Jesus wore to his crucifixion was not of the thorn bush variety, but was rather a white cloth band with a piece of wood (or perhaps an emerald) in the shape of a thorn, stitched into it, indicating a thorn from the vine of the Line of King David. This was the crown (Ring of Power) of a Davidic King. This would indicate that the soldiers probably did not put a Crown and robe on Jesus out of derision, but out of respect.
In 6 AD, the capital of Judea was moved to the city of Caesarea, on the Mediterranean coast. This is where the Roman Procurators actually resided (also installed in Judea at this time).  Caesarea was built by the Herods in an attempt to keep favor with the Romans, to make life easier for their people.
Herod the Great was actually a very great and popular king until his latter years, when many Herods slipped into madness. This is highlighted by his Grandson, Agrippa (who had supplanted Antipas), who also later slipped into madness (he was the Herod who mocked Jesus at his trial).
Though in the cinema, the Jerusalem Temple is depicted as a very large structure, it was actually quite diminutive. If you have ever been to the Temple Mount, you may notice some solitary stone jutting through the platform in the northwest corner. This was called the "Foundation Stone of the World", and the Holy of Holies was built around it. Its eastern entrance faced the eastern wall gate (now sealed to maintain structural soundness), and on the 25th of December, then the Winter Solstice, every 8 years, Venus shown into the Holy of Holies with a luminosity factor of 99.5%, rising 24 minutes before dawn at a declination of minus 23 minutes and 16 seconds. This is how the lunar, sidereal, and solar calendars were kept in alignment.
That the Dome of the Rock built on the Temple Mount is built directly on top of a pentagram-shaped Temple to Ashtoreth; the Mother Goddess in Canaanite/Phoenician theology.
One big problem in comparing Greek manuscripts is that because a manuscript is older does not automatically mean that is more valid or more accurate.  This is because early theological "tweaking" of manuscripts can happen while later exact copies of the common source actually maintained integrity.  As such, theologians should not be looked upon with contempt when it is found that they were using altered (though perhaps earlier) copies. This is a very confusing and quite difficult professional field, and most-all do in fact try to remain as accurate as they can be, based upon the documents they have available.
It is interesting that Magus in the Gospels is translated correctly as "Wise Man" and "Magi", but in Act this same word is inaccurately translated to Sorcerer.
Paul is very derisive and often blasphemous with people he does not agree with, and especially those he persecutes (often unjustly).  A very careful reading of Acts, Romans, and his Letters make this quite clear (he even openly admits to this lying and the unjust practices).  A very careful reading of these works from the Greek, along with an understanding of his "I am great and you are not" attitude, of the slang and jargon of the time, and an understanding of the conservative moral standards of the time will paint a completely different picture than the one presently presented in traditional New Covenant translations.
Pontius Pilate was a very insensitive man who was not very good at his job and was always doing things that justly upset the Jews. However, according to external texts, his wife Claudia was a follower of Jesus, and this may have softened his hand when dealing with Jesus at the trial.
From listening to preaching from the pulpit, you would think that the most important woman in the New Covenant was Jesus' mother. But in reading the actual gospels, it is quite clearly Mary Magdalene, who was NOT a prostitute, but a Royal Hasmonean Princess, daughter of Syrus, the Jairus Priest and Eucharia, whose own father was Menahem (of the royal Davidic Line), founder of the Samaritan Magi and a Dynastic Priest, and her mother was also a Hasmonean Princess. Indeed, Mary Magdalene and her sister Martha were both a Migdal-eder (Towers/Castles of the Flock), and Magdalene cults flourished centuries before the Church invented Virgin Mary cults in an attempt to counter them.
The 7 Norte Dame Cathedrals built by the Templars in France were all dedicated to their most revered Mother of the Church; Mary Magdalene.  When the Roman Church illegally wrested control of them, they were wrongfully rededicated to Jesus' mother (the Templars were required to make a devotion to "the Obedience of Bethany, the castle of Mary and Martha".  Note that Magdalene comes from Migdal-Eder, "the Tower/Castle of the Flock"; See (OT) Micah 4:8).
The first above-ground Christian Church was built in Glastonbury, Britain by Joseph of Arimathea, and dedicated in 64 AD, one year after Mary Magdalene died, by Joseph of Arimathea and Jesus Justus. The corner stone with "Jesus Maria" etched on it was in honor of Jesus and Mary Magdalene, NOT of Jesus' mother (a Virgin Mary cult did not exist for several more centuries), and the stone rests to this day in the Benedictine Abbey now at this site.
In Gospel times, religions and politics were synonymous.  Though Jesus and his father belonged to the Hellenistic Party (using the universal language Greek in their Services), Jesus belonged to the Peace Hellenist Party, along with Nathaniel (Jonathan Annas), Matthew Annas, John Mark (Bartholomew), Philip, Peter, and Andrew. Joseph, his father, belonged to the War Hellenist Party, along with Simon the Patriot (Zebedee), Thaddeus, and James and John of Zebedee. The conservative Hebrew party, once led by John the Baptist, had James Justus (the brother of Jesus), Thomas (Prince Philip Herod I), and Jesus' mother. This is interesting, because the Hebrews did not recognize Jesus' regal legitimacy early on, recognizing instead James as the legitimate regal heir (though James was a long-time secret disciple). Thomas acknowledged Jesus' legitimacy after the crucifixion. However, Jesus' own mother, though like a good mother she would walk with Jesus, did not recognize Jesus as a legitimate heir until James' witnessing to her finally convinced her in 43 AD.
In 44 AD, Mary Magdalene, Simon Zealot, Philip, Martha, and Mary Jacob-Cleophas fled into exile to the Herod estates in the region of Lyons, Gaul (near Marseilles) after Simon (a master Magi and Therapeutate) had provided the poison that killed the megalomaniac Herod Agrippa, after Herod of Chalcis had James of Zebedee murdered for conspiring against Agrippa.  Interestingly, Herod Agrippa II, Agrippa's own son, provided travel immunity and safe passage to the exiles to the Herod estates (joining Herod Aristobulous, Herod Antipas, Herodias, and Herod Archelaus), where they had total immunity from Roman persecution.  Note: Chalcis also had Thaddeus beheaded on the spot at the Jordan River shortly afterward.
There is evidence that suggests that Malthace the Hasmonean, mother to Herod Antipas, was the sister of Thaddeus (a Dynastic Priest) and Eucharia (a royal Hasmonean Princess and mother to Mary Magdalene and Martha Magdalene), who were children of Menahem, founder of the Magi and of the Royal Davidic Line, and whose wife was a Dynastic Hasmonean.
That Lazarus (Hebrew Eleazar) was a title given to all High Priests who had been deposed.
Martha, sister to Mary Magdalene, and a Magdalene (Tower of the Flock) in her own right, was also noted in external documents as Mary Martha-Helena, which more accurately translates to "Beloved Lady of Light". She was the wife of Lazarus (her devotional "brother"), who was Simon Zealot; a deposed High Priest (all deposed High Priests had the title Lazarus – he was deposed in November of 32 AD due to his Zealot (Patriot) activity).
Monks in the Gospel period were Dynastic Priests who had the right to become High Priest and Abiathar Priest (titular Michael/God and Gabriel). They also had the right to give excommunication and release people from excommunication on their own authority (as long as they had valid reasons).
The Merovingian Kings (called the Fisher Kings, Sorcerer Kings, and Priest Kings), who were deposed by a conspiracy between the Roman Church and the Mayor of the Palace (and falsely inventing "history" that the Merovingians were decadent and powerless – a totally false fabrication), could prove descent from King David from the Royal House of Judah, and could actually prove descent from both Jesus and Mary Magdalene (this is why they were such a threat to the Roman Church, whose Papal authority the Merovingians were also overshadowing).
That Peter was the Bishop of Antioch, who had a tremendous flock, and as such, could never have been Bishop of Rome. A bishopric was a lifetime post, though they could embark on evangelical missions, which he did do, to Rome. One could not be bishop of more than one diocese. The only way he could have become bishop of Rome was if the Bishopric of Antioch were dissolved (as James Justus, Bishop of Jerusalem, had done in Judea in 62 AD to his bishopric at the Jerusalem Church, when Roman persecution had become too intense and the Christians had abandoned Judea, and he then became Bishop of Glastonbury). However, the Bishopric of Antioch exists to this day.
A "Fisher" was a title for a baptismal priest.
The "eye of a needle" was an animal gate, next to the main city gate, where livestock were permitted to enter (the main gate was for human traffic only).  Most livestock were goats and sheep, but horses and donkeys could enter easily. The very rare camel was so large it was required to kneel and crawl through.  The parable of the eye of the need comes from this, indicating someone must be humbled to enter the gates of heaven.
In the KJV, to be "Immortal" was to be incapable of corruption.
In the KJV, to be "Jealous" was to be "Zealous".
The Greek word "{zelotes}" (Zelotes), is normally left untranslated, being simply transposed, to a corrupted variation of the word, as "Zealote".  This word actually translates properly to English as "Patriot" or "Patriotic".
The Hebrew "Bar" or Semitic "Ben", normally translated to "Son", also equally translates to "Servant", "Minister", "Attendant", "Member", "Adherent", and "Follower".
In the KJV, "Motions" means emotions, impulses, or passions.
In the KJV, "Outlandish" referred to a foreigner, beyond the local land.
In the KJV, an "ordinance" referred to a tradition.
In the KJV, a "Parable" was an utterance that involved a comparison.
In the KJV, to "Procure" was to "seek".
In the KJV, to "Profit" was to "Advance".
In the KJV, the word "Quit" meant many things: "to keep on", "blameless", and "innocent".  Indeed, "Quit you" meant to tell someone to "be brave", and to "quit you like men" was to "show one's self to be a man".
In the KJV, to "Require" was to "ask" or "demand".
In the KJV, to "Requite" was to repay, give back, recompense, repay, or restore.
In the KJV "Salt" referred to the "Dead Sea", on the eastern bounds of Judea.
In the KJV, the word "Simple" referred to someone who was innocent, honest, straightforward, or harmless.
In the KJV, the word "smite" indicated to beat or strike, its original, Gospel-era meaning was to cut or flay.  Indeed, to smite one's breast meant that one had cut one's self with a blade, to show protest or passion or mourning.
Though "wearing ashes" is assume to be one placing ashes from a fire pit on one's head to show mourning, its original meaning was to places burning embers on one's head, this small disfigurement showing that one would never be the same after the passing of their beloved.
In the KJV, "Spikenard" refers to a precious ointment made from a herb in the valerian family.  However, this was originally the oil from a monitor lizard, called a "dragon", which was a symbol of royalty.
In the KJV, the word "stranger" refers to a foreigner.
Mt Horeb is the Aramaic title the Israelites used for Moses' mountain (Mt Sinai, to the north, was not so-named until 2000 years later, when monks built a monastery there).  In Aramaic, "Horeb" means "Desert".  The current name for this mountain is Mt Serâbît, located in the desert region of Serâbît el-Khâdim.  Note also that the title, "Mt Sinai" did exist at all until several centuries following the Gospel period, when it was added to the Vulgate Latin Bible translation, due to traditions from the pulpit, rather than from the Hebrew texts, which never stated this.
Jesus' namesake, Joshua (Yehowshuwa, meaning, "The Nameless One is salvation"), whose title, "ben newn", normally translated into English as "Son of Nun", equally translated to, "The Servant of/at 50".  This was a then-common title indicating a Crowned Prince, and not to a geneological descent from a man called 'Nun'.  This was because the rank of 50 (Nun) was the commonly understood numerical ranking of a Crowned Prince, whereas King, ranked immediately above Prince, had the ranking of 60. This tradition of numerical ranking goes back several thousand years to its origin in ancient Mesopotamia, where rankings went as high as 4000 and 5000 for a lower-rank Prince or Princess.
If you double-click and underlined verse reference in the Definitions panel, you will be taken to that verse.
